People often imagine armed conflicts
being won or lost on the battlefield.
Armies advance, enemies retreat, and
eventually one side wins. But modern
wars rarely end that way. They end when
three things start breaking at the same
time: munitions, markets, and midterms.
These pressure points determine how long
hostilities can realistically continue.
In the first five days of this war, the
United States burned through roughly 800
Patriot interceptors. Once munitions
begin to run low, commanders must face
difficult choices. They can either slow
the pace of operations or redeploy
assets from elsewhere. The Pentagon has
opted for the latter. It is
cannibalizing missile systems across
Asia-Pacific to sustain combat
operations. This video shows six THAAD
launchers being removed from the US base
in South Korea and being redeployed to
the Middle East.
Markets, however, don't care about
battlefield victories. They're concerned
with stability. If investors believe a
conflict might escalate into a prolonged
crisis, they begin preparing for the
economic consequences long before those
consequences fully appear.
Data centers shut down, shipping
companies change routes, capital starts
moving towards safer assets, and so on.
The closing of the Strait of Hormuz, for
instance, doesn't just affect fuel
prices. It ripples through freight,
food, housing, and even water
infrastructure.
Modern life rests on stable energy
flows, and once those begin to
fluctuate, the effects spread outward.
So, while military planners focus on
operational objectives, political
leaders must also consider how the
conflict is upsetting inflation, energy
prices, and the broader economy. Even
superpowers must negotiate with reality.
We may be living in what feels like the
most anxiety-inducing era in recent
memory. Not necessarily the most
dangerous period in history, but one
that often feels that way. Between
alarming headlines, endless commentary,
and the temptation to keep
doomscrolling, it's easy to feel
overwhelmed by everything happening
around us. I caught myself in that
spiral [music] recently, just scrolling
through updates late at night, one
headline after another. At some point,
you're no longer staying informed,
you're just feeding the anxiety. One
thing that can help is simply having
space to step back and process it all.
For many people, therapy [music]
provides that space, a chance to
reflect, gain perspective, and better
understand the patterns shaping how we
think and respond to stress.
BetterHelp, the sponsor of today's
episode, [music] makes it easier to
start therapy. You can take a short quiz
and get matched with a credentialed
therapist, and you can communicate in
the way that works best for you, whether
by phone, video, or text. And if the
match isn't [music] right, you can
switch therapists at any time at no
extra cost. More than 6 million people
have already gotten help through
BetterHelp. If you're interested, click
the link in the description or go to
betterhelp.com/caspianreport [music]
to get 10% off your first month of
therapy.
The first pressure point in modern
warfare is munitions. Everything hinges
on this. At first glance, the US
military appears almost limitless in
firepower. Precision missiles can strike
targets hundreds of kilometers away,
satellites track movements in real time,
while air defense systems intercept
rockets mid-flight. It almost looks as
if advanced militaries can simply keep
fighting for as long as they want, but
there is a quiet reality behind all of
this. Modern weapons are extraordinarily
difficult to produce.
A Tomahawk missile is not just a metal
tube filled with explosives. It contains
specialized electronics, advanced
guidance systems, and components that
come from long supply chains. Many of
those parts are produced in small
quantities by only a handful of
manufacturers.
The same is true for interceptor
missiles, long-range drones, and
precision-guided bombs, which means
these weapons cannot be replaced
quickly.
At the start of a conflict, this problem
is easy to miss. Militaries rely on
stockpiles built up over years. Those
reserves allow them to sustain a high
tempo of strikes in the early stages of
a war. Missiles fly, air defenses
intercept, and so commanders operate as
if supply is not an issue.
But stockpiles don't last forever, and
once they begin to shrink, the war
starts to run into industrial
constraints.
Factories cannot scale production
overnight. Doing so would require time,
skilled labor, and above all, multi-year
contracts with suppliers.
Take the SM-3 interceptor missile as an
example. The US Navy uses it to shoot
down ballistic missiles. Depending on
the variant, each missile costs roughly
10 to 28 million dollars. That price tag
reflects its complexity.
The missile must detect a ballistic
warhead in space, track it, and collide
with it at several kilometers per second
using a kinetic kill vehicle. It's
essentially a small spacecraft designed
to destroy another object traveling
faster than a bullet.
But, because of that complexity, the
production of SM-3 missiles is limited.
The exact number is classified, but
they're produced in relatively small
batches, often only dozens per year,
depending on the Pentagon's
procurements. Another example is the
Patriot PAC-3 interceptor, one of the
main missiles used by America and Israel
to shoot down Iranian missiles. Each
PAC-3 interceptor costs roughly 4 to 5
million dollars. However, in spite of
its widespread use, production is
relatively limited. In 2025,
manufacturer Lockheed Martin produced
around 620 PAC-3 interceptors. That
seems plenty at first, but modern air
defense systems often fire multiple
interceptors at a single incoming
missile to ensure a successful kill.
In a prolonged high-intensity conflict,
this equation gradually shifts the
nature of the war. One night of missile
defense can burn through months of
production. This video shows over a
dozen Patriot interceptors launched from
the local US airbase during an Iranian
missile barrage. That's about 2% of the
Patriots annual production gone in under
a minute. No war machine runs this hot
forever.
The same munitions constraint exists on
the Iranian side, though it looks very
different. Iran possesses one of the
largest ballistic missile arsenals in
the Middle East, estimated at several
thousand.
But, missiles alone do not determine how
much firepower a country can bring to
the battlefield. They also need
launchers.
These launch vehicles must constantly
move, hide, and reposition. The moment a
missile is fired, sensors and satellites
can often trace the launch back to its
origin, making the vehicle itself a
prime target. Destroy enough of these
launchers, and even a large missile
stockpile becomes useless.
Iran has also invested heavily in
drones, which push the economics of war
even further. Systems like the Shahed
are rudimentary when compared to
missiles, but they're built with small
engines and basic electronics, and are
estimated to cost between 20 and 50,000
dollars each, with some estimates going
as low as 7,000.
Launched in waves, these drones force
defenders to spend far more expensive
interceptors, gradually saturating air
defenses and exhausting stockpiles
faster than they can be replenished.
Altogether, these dynamics show that
modern warfare depends as much on
industry as on tactics. Victory belongs
to the side that can sustain the flow of
weapons.
Armed conflicts today face another
pressure point that did not exist to the
same degree in the past, financial
markets. The moment fighting breaks out
in a strategically important region,
energy prices move within hours, [music]
transportation costs rise, and investors
start reassessing risks. Oftentimes,
these market fluctuations happen long
before governments decide how to
respond.
We're already seeing this dynamic
unfold. Oil prices jumped as soon as
hostilities began to disrupt traffic
near the Strait of Hormuz.
Governments moved quickly to calm
markets by releasing strategic reserves
and signaling that additional supplies
could be brought online if needed. Those
measures helped stabilize prices for the
moment, but the episode illustrates how
sensitive global markets are.
And this is not just about oil. Once
energy markets begin moving, the effects
trickle down. Freight becomes more
expensive, manufacturing costs rise, and
inflation begins creeping upward again.
All these disruptions move far faster
than military campaigns, and they ripple
through global supply chains.
Fertilizer production, for example,
depends heavily on natural gas. When
energy prices rise, the cost of
producing ammonia, the key ingredient in
nitrogen fertilizers, rises as well.
That increase eventually reaches
farmers, which, months from now, raises
the cost of staple crops such as wheat,
corn, [music] and rice.
Global aviation is another example. The
Middle East sits at the crossroads of
major air routes connecting Europe,
Asia, and Africa. About 2/3 of the
global population lives within an 8-hour
flight of Doha and Dubai.
So, when missiles, drones, or air
defense systems threaten regional
airspace, carriers are forced to reroute
flights around the danger zones. This is
how the region's airspace looks right
now. Azerbaijan is effectively the
single direct link between Europe and
Asia.
But, it's more than just that. The
trickle-down consequences don't
necessarily stay local. Distant sectors
feel them, too. Much of the recent
momentum in the American stock market
and a hefty portion of US economic
growth is driven by a handful of tech
giants, often referred to as the
Magnificent Seven. These companies
dominate the market. In 2023 alone, they
accounted for around 60% of the S&P
500's total return, [music] which goes
to show just how concentrated the market
rally has become.
However, the expansion of these tech
giants depends on massive investments in
artificial intelligence infrastructure,
particularly the data centers [music]
that power cloud computing and machine
learning. The UAE, Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
and Bahrain have been actively courting
these tech giants to host regional cloud
and AI hubs in an effort to position
themselves as digital infrastructure
centers.
But Iran treats this digital
infrastructure as part of the conflict
itself. Iranian drones have already
damaged Amazon data centers in the UAE
and Bahrain, which have disrupted cloud
services used by banks and companies in
the region. [music] Google, Amazon,
Microsoft, Nvidia, IBM, Oracle, and
Palantir are now all legitimate targets,
according to the IRGC.
By threatening or damaging the overseas
[music] infrastructure of these firms,
Iran is attempting to hurt the digital
backbone of the American tech sector and
by extension a key engine of US economic
growth.
Pipelines, shipping, fertilizers, data
[music] centers, that's just the start.
The ripple effects run even deeper into
the global economy. Petrochemical
production relies heavily on oil and gas
feedstocks. Semiconductor supply chains
depend on predictable shipping routes
and specialized industrial materials.
Gulf sovereign wealth funds manage
trillions of dollars in assets
worldwide, so any instability that
forces them to move their capital can
echo across financial markets.
Taken together, these examples reveal
just how many critical systems underpin
the global economy. A prolonged conflict
with Iran will shape prices, [music]
supply chains, and growth across the
planet. And as those disruptions mount,
the White House will gradually yield to
investors and markets.
Politics is the third and final pressure
point. It's less visible than weapons or
markets, but just as powerful. While
military campaigns can stretch for
years, elections arrive on schedule, and
that mismatch eventually creates
pressure.
At the start of a conflict, political
leaders usually enjoy broad public
support. Governments have room to act,
and military operations move forward
with relatively little domestic
resistance. But that unity rarely lasts
forever.
As hostilities drag on, questions begin
to surface. What are the objectives? How
long will this continue? What are the
costs? Those questions grow louder once
the war begins to affect everyday life,
whether through rising fuel costs,
higher inflation, or the steady drip of
casualties.
In the United States, the next political
clock is always ticking. Every 2 years,
Americans elect a new Congress. The next
one is scheduled for November 2026.
In that election, all 435 seats in the
House of Representatives
>> [music]
>> and roughly 1/3 of the seats in the
Senate will be on the ballot.
These midterm elections often become a
referendum on the sitting president's
policies, especially during periods of
economic stress or military conflict. A
war that drags on too long can quickly
turn into a political liability, even if
the fighting itself remains far away.
Lawmakers, particularly those from swing
districts and swing states, are usually
the first to distance themselves from
unpopular policies. Not necessarily
because the war has been lost, but
because the domestic political
environment can no longer sustain it.
For a president, that creates a dilemma.
Armies can fight for as long as their
supplies last, economies can absorb
shocks for a time, but political
legitimacy must be renewed at the ballot
box. So, if the war with Iran drags on
long enough to collide with the midterm
election, the pressure will not only
come from the battlefield or the
markets, it will also come from Capitol
Hill.
When viewed together, munitions,
markets, and midterms will determine the
outcome of this conflict. Each of these
pressure points can shape political
decisions. Iran understands this dynamic
and leans into it. The attacks on
tankers and data centers are meant to
stretch missile supply chains, unsettle
global markets, and wait for political
pressure in Washington to build. And as
these pressure points converge at the
same time, they will begin to narrow
Trump's room for maneuver. Before long,
total victory is spun into acceptable
outcome. That would be the trade-off.
There is a sense of irony in all this.
The war meant to weaken Iran could
instead leave the country with Khamenei
just 30 years younger.
I've been your host Shirvan from Caspian
Report. If you enjoy these videos,
consider supporting the channel on
Patreon, and click the bell icon so the
next one doesn't slip past you. Thank
you for your time and ciao.
>> [music]